# Thought Experiment Workshop (9/4)

The thought: What if there was a world where, every time someone died, they became a ghost? Without fail, 100% guaranteed, every person who has ever lived becomes a ghost upon death, visible to everyone else. Their appearance and mental capacity are returned to the optimal state from their physical life, and possession is an impossibility.  

Further questions and observations:
-How does a ghost life work? Is a ghost life infinite, or does it have a natural ending?
	Ghosts can finally perish either through ritualistic expulsion OR by their last living descendant expiring. “Descendant” would be defined as the direct line of biological relatives from father/mother to child, etc. Nieces, nephews, and the like do not count in this situation. Adopted children do not prolong the ghost lives of their adoptive parents but of their biological parents, even if they are unknown.
	Furthermore, ghosts would fall under two categories, randomly “assigned” to them upon their deaths: the first is Vapor—these ghosts are only visible. They cannot interact with the living world/people/objects and are incapable of vocalizing. The second type is Interactive—these can minimally interact with corporeal items (i.e., mimic the sensory experience of skin-to-skin contact, knock around small objects), and speak. Ghost life limits their capabilities for certain, but far less so that of Vapor ghosts.


-Does the long-standing “survival” of well-preserved families over smaller lines determine power hierarchies and control?
	If ghosts from centuries past are still around, then this would heavily affect the political atmosphere in most places. The influence of some of the longest existing family lines would dominate over that of the living and shorter lines. Political structures similar to oligarchies and monarchies might arise around the world depending on geographic locations and the preferences of the people living in those places. Whatever the case may be, it would be comparable to real-world politics, with ghost lines being the determining factor of power rather than money, prestige, or persuasiveness. 

-Regarding rules of ghost survival, does this affect the societal norms of child-rearing?
	Assuming most people are heavily concerned with preserving the ghost lives of their ancestors and descendants, then raising one’s own children (multiple children being the goal) would become a prominent value and social more, with adoption and the foster care system becoming less commonly seen or used. Parents want to ensure the well-being and survival of their children and that their familial ghosts are protected. If children are handed up for adoption without the guarantee of another child, there is a chance something terrible could happen to the child without the biological parents knowing, and then the line is doomed. Adoption is a worst-case scenario, where the parent dies and leaves a child behind, or the parent deems themselves too young to care for a child (in the latter situation, children are given up because the parent feels there is time for them to have another child). Situations where a child must be taken from their parents are undesirable (for purposes of personally monitoring and protecting the line), so in most cases, parents have the motivation to provide their children with a good life.

-Further thinking: how does this affect relationships (specifically marital)?
	For the most part, dating and marriage would work as expected. For those who are infertile or can’t have children, finding a partner might be more difficult. Yet, if having children is now important—or even necessary—then it is feasible to say that extensive research has been done in medical science over the centuries to create a range of technologies and treatments that make biological procreation more consistent. The downside is that, like most medical procedures, it would be an expensive process that not everyone can afford. So, depending on an individual’s income, marital relationships might be defined by their ability to have children.

-How does the expulsion ritual work? Is it viewed as a job anyone can become qualified to perform, or is it more akin to a religion? 
	Going around killing ghosts for no good reason might be considered murder. Thus, to legally perform the expulsion/banishment ritual, one must have the proper license and training.* There is no scientific explanation for the ghosts in this world (that has been discovered, at least), so “killing” ghosts is a religious endeavor consisting of prayers (tailored to the individual being expelled) and archaic holy rituals. The rituals are not derived from the practices of existing religions. Ghost-killing is practically a religion of its own focused on breaching the barrier of the living/mortal plane. 
	Time and numerous translations have produced a large variety of relatively simple rituals with the same basic premise. Center the ghost somewhere holy or sacred (both terms being loosely interpreted—if the ghost in question “worshipped” or revered books, for example, a bookstore might function as a holy place), say a prayer to the barrier for the passing of the soul, and have the ghost accept the intercessor’s prayer. 

*Would people kill ghosts illegally?
	Murder is a pretty hard vice to eradicate, so we will assume yes. Long-lived grudges, feuds, politically-charged hatred, mindless hatred, etc., are all motivators for hunting down specific, individual ghosts and banishing them to the proper afterlife. Desperation to eliminate ancient family lines (or just really old ghosts) increases the need for an illegal assassination market. There are those who specialize in killing ghosts and those who kill living humans to erase an entire line (or because completing the ritual is too difficult). Tricking a ghost into the banishment ritual is a complicated process of manipulation and lying, but some are rather skilled at that. 

-Since much (or the majority of society) would be made up of the previously dead, would this affect both the job market and living situations/city designs?
	It’s unlikely that ghosts would return to regular jobs like grocer, librarian, or secretary. But they could still serve as politicians, writers (publishing posthumously with some help on the physical side), scientists, and researchers (again, with some help). Jobs that focus on the ability to think and not necessarily physical capabilities could be filled by ghosts. Otherwise, ghost life would act as a prolonged retirement where they aid in raising their families as much as they can. 
	Sleep and housing are not necessary for ghosts to survive but are wanted as comforts since they are used to having a “home.” After their first deaths, ghosts’ physical properties are handed off to descendants who let some ghosts live with them or send them to live in a designated ghost residence. Tall buildings to maximize space, maybe miniature cities/towns solely focused on housing the dead? Diversity in city demographics. 

-Possibility of unique scientific fields based on the study of ghosts? 

-What would be the legal protections and rights for the ghosts? Are there any?
